Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) is a disorder with onset during the developmental period that includes both intellectual and adaptive functioning deficits in conceptual, social, and practical domains. The following three criteria must be met:
A. Deficits in intellectual functions, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience, confirmed by both clinical assessment and individualized, standardized intelligence testing.
B. Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet developmental and socio­cultural standards for personal independence and social responsibility. Without ongo­ing support, the adaptive deficits limit functioning in one or more activities of daily life, such as communication, social participation, and independent living, across multiple environments, such as home, school, work, and community.
C. Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental period.
Note: The diagnostic term intellectual disability is the equivalent term for the ICD-11 diag­nosis of intellectual developmental disorders. Although the term intellectual disability is used throughout this manual, both terms are used in the title to clarify relationships with other classification systems. Moreover, a federal statute in the United States (Public Law 111 -256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term mental retardation with intellectual disability, and research journals use the term intellectual disability. Thus, intellectual disability is the term in common use by medical, educational, and other professions and by the lay public and advocacy groups.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) is 319, which is assigned regardless of the severity specifier. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the severity specifier (see below).

Specify current severity (see Table 1 ):
(F70) Mild 
(F71) lUloderate 
(F72) Severe 
(F73) Profound
## Specifiers
The various levels of severity are defined on the basis of adaptive functioning, and not IQ scores, because it is adaptive functioning that determines the level of supports required. Moreover, IQ measures are less valid in the lower end of the IQ range.& ë3(0« -p ii Hilf Ili I1 1 1I  s l i ’’’« I  &? *  §« l l i i l  l î H iω ’S 3 I  -Sυ . (ΰ Qj -Π ^-  I § l -  Sjo 2 -j3 ■£ 2 S !  ^  e C O "2| i l | s  H i " -I-CΛEoT3&υcoÜÖ &* M) 2 ̂ë “I δ δ 8 Î  •ë S u ^  2  ο « 3 | i l ^  I ̂ HI  -S ^ ë ^ -Si  •'i o ® ^^ > C CΊ3 > C .5 (ΰ iör s i s  Ϊ1 I 2 I2 ^  Ë o. gi  S o § ^« 1 c ^ΚΓ\ (ö o fyω ü > 03 73cß 2 Si P -j3 b3 § δ α 3 i^ c fÇ Cu o öo(/> C H fC cß «duun<HIIIIΦΈocaE0 “Ö1 I5 ί  -s glu llI  -S s  s. I0> o U CL ^*  .S § S ·- ||lll m i l3 ΐ  S I  “1|1| IÎ I IH & | § | |  3 -2 'S -6ninsΦIΦ0)111nc•(ÔE0 ■ÖΛ1 Ü CoÜδ §I fr i  Ϊ ̂ υ T3'â  3 iS II  i2•Ό SIIuB<u ID os u (Ü= id .55c Û „ ̂ cn ^S 6 ^^5 2ί 5•X3  ̂ tp ^3̂ ^fc a o> ^ÖC O) 03 >p ω bOT3ÿ.S^ Ι Ή  δ Ι̂ _2 : 1 1  ë •;2 C c Ο α» fc'S  ̂ ;3 ε ■£ (D 'SÔ-.Sh Cl, ^s i m î| l | l l | ,lo  ̂ ^  'm 'a° p js b  S'C> S <^1üS2IS«EθΛΟIο ο ’>It l= 11g β οs-tf c o — .as l is ^ tc s s û,a ^« s gS js « g ^  g'S C o ^Î I I«Oh  ̂ .a tÔ O V  ̂ ^  ζΛ Qh'-*-1 9̂m  J ̂^ I l  s > I„ s ·5 o x; Äliiin ̂ (Λ 73 "il -4-.«3 ÔÛ_o s è T: '-Ö 'TSc*côEo■Ö10•S υ ΦV+H C/5 9̂ ÎHI s " l i•Si ê  ̂ s ^■S -e  ̂ s °I Ii ' i  § ^ fS dË § g s ^1  s ^g.55 Sb 2O) T-( (ÖI l s j l^ l l - lS I i -ïi Sg> .o o g cςΐ, > bO G CÖ CDæ X-M bO V oj 3|i| ir|l|1i5 X S2 υ 'C  ̂ O) föï l l l l .ç 'S o ’2 δo c c c o ·-H H „3 CDÛJ If i  1 ^ 1  o d  ̂ “ c 'Λ 2 ■£ S2 § '-C -r S a..^  S  ̂ ii Φ00 § .&. a; 73J2 Ë ^ 5 S2 S S
(03IIIIIa^ c ^  ^ Sc)̂'m Ci111s l l8 -^ 1oeS ^1 1 11 1  =î3 jo£  .2 s<,2d>c 0> W)0 . > Ci1 E Î i ls l i l ÉO)  ̂ ^bO  ̂ c :s Λÿ ÿ i î n . é1 1 1  s ^ iI ί II i 4 s ^ . l l l i5 Æu cruDiagnostic FeaturesThe essential fèatures of intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) are deficits in general mental abilities (Criterion A) and impairment in everyday adaptive functioning, in comparison to an individual's age-, gender-, and socioculturally matched peers (Criterion B). Onset is during the developmental period (Criterion C). The diagnosis of intellectual disability is based on both clinical assessment and standardized testing of intellectual and adaptive functions.Criterion A refers to intellectual functions that involve reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, judgment, learning from instruction and experience, and practical understanding. Critical components include verbal comprehension, working memory, perceptual reasoning, quantitative reasoning, abstract thought, and cognitive ef­ficacy. Intellectual functioning is typically measured with individually administered and psychometrically valid, comprehensive, culturally appropriate, psychometrically sound tests of intelligence. Individuals with intellectual disability have scores of approximately two standard deviations or more below the population mean, including a margin for mea­surement error (generally +5 points). On tests with a standard deviation of 15 and a mean of 100, this involves a score of 65-75 (70 ± 5). Clinical training and judgment are required to interpret test results and assess intellectual performance.Factors that may affect test scores include practice effects and the "Flynn effect' (i.e., overly high scores due to out-of-date test norms). Invalid scores may result from the use of brief intelligence screening tests or group tests; highly discrepant individual subtest scores may make an overall IQ score invalid. Instruments must be normed for the individual's so­ciocultural background and native language. Co-occurring disorders that affect communi­cation, language, and/or motor or sensory function may affect test scores. Individual cognitive profiles based on neuropsychological testing are more useful for understanding intellectual abilities than a single IQ score. Such testing may identify areas of relative strengths and weaknesses, an assessment important for academic and vocational planning.IQ test scores are approximations of conceptual functioning but may be insufficient to assess reasoning in real-life situations and mastery of practical tasks. For example, a per­son with an IQ score above 70 may have such severe adaptive behavior problems in social judgment, social understanding, and other areas of adaptive functioning that the person's actual functioning is comparable to that of individuals with a lower IQ score. Thus, clinical judgment is needed in interpreting the results of IQ tests.Deficits in adaptive functioning (Criterion B) refer to how well a person meets community standards of personal independence and social responsibility, in comparison to others of sim­ilar age and sociocultural background. Adaptive functioning involves adaptive reasoning in three domains: conceptual, social, and practical. The conceptual (academic) domain involves competence in memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, acquisition of practical knowledge, problem solving, and judgment in novel situations, among others. The social do­main involves awareness of others' thoughts, feelings, and experiences; empathy; interper­sonal communication skills; friendship abilities; and social judgment, among others. The practical domain involves learning and self-management across life settings, including personal care, job responsibilities, money management, recreation, self-management of behavior, and school and work task organization, among others. Intellectual capacity, education, motivation, socialization, personality features, vocational opportunity, cultural experience, and coexisting general medical conditions or mental disorders influence adaptive functioning.Adaptive functioning is assessed using both clinical evaluation and individualized, culturally appropriate, psychometrically sound measures. Standardized measures are used with knowledgeable informants (e.g., parent or other family member; teacher; coun­selor; care provider) and the individual to the extent possible. Additional sources of infor­mation include educational, developmental, medical, and mental health evaluations. Scores from standardized measures and interview sources must be interpreted using clin­ical judgment. When standardized testing is difficult or impossible, because of a variety offactors (e.g., sensory impairment, severe problem behavior), the individual may be diag­nosed with unspecified intellectual disability. Adaptive functioning may be difficult to assess in a controlled setting (e.g., prisons, detention centers); if possible, corroborative in­formation reflecting functioning outside those settings should be obtained.Criterion B is met when at least one domain of adaptive functioning—conceptual, so­cial, or practical—is sufficiently impaired that ongoing support is needed in order for the person to perform adequately in one or more life settings at school, at work, at home, or in the community. To meet diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability, the deficits in adap­tive functioning must be directly related to the intellectual impairments described in Cri­terion A. Criterion C, onset during the developmental period, refers to recognition that intellectual and adaptive deficits are present during childhood or adolescence.Associated Features Supporting DiagnosisIntellectual disability is a heterogeneous condition with multiple causes. There may be associated difficulties with social judgment; assessment of risk; self-management of behav­ior, emotions, or interpersonal relationships; or motivation in school or work environments. Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive and aggressive behaviors. Gull­ibility is often a feature, involving naiveté in social situations and a tendency for being easily led by others. Gullibility and lack of awareness of risk may result in exploitation by others and possible victimization, fraud, unintentional criminal involvement, false confessions, and risk for physical and sexual abuse. These associated features can be important in crim­inal cases, including Atkins-type hearings involving the death penalty.Individuals with a diagnosis of intellectual disability with co-occurring mental disor­ders are at risk for suicide. They think about suicide, make suicide attempts, and may die from them. Thus, screening for suicidal thoughts is essential in the assessment process. Be­cause of a lack of awareness of risk and danger, accidental injury rates may be increased.PrevalenceIntellectual disability has an overall general population prevalence of approximately 1%, and prevalence rates vary by age. Prevalence for severe intellectual disability is approxi­mately 6 per 1,000.Deveiopment and CourseOnset of intellectual disability is in the developmental period. The age and characteristic features at onset depend on the etiology and severity of brain dysfunction. Delayed motor, language, and social milestones may be identifiable within the first 2 years of life among those with more severe intellectual disability, while mild levels may not be identifiable un­til school age when difficulty with academic learning becomes apparent. All criteria (in­cluding Criterion C) must be fulfilled by history or current presentation. Some children under age 5 years whose presentation will eventually meet criteria for intellectual disabil­ity have deficits that meet criteria for global developmental delay.When intellectual disability is associated with a genetic syndrome, there may be a char­acteristic physical appearance (as in, e.g.. Down syndrome). Some syndromes have a behavioral phenotype, which refers to specific behaviors that are characteristic of particular genetic disorder (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). In acquired forms, the onset may be abrupt following an illness such as meningitis or encephalitis or head trauma occurring during the developmental period. When intellectual disability results from a loss of pre­viously acquired cognitive skills, as in severe traumatic brain injury, the diagnoses of in­tellectual disability and of a neurocognitive disorder may both be assigned.Although intellectual disability is generally nonprogressive, in certain genetic disor­ders (e.g., Rett syndrome) there are periods of worsening, followed by stabilization, and inothers (e.g., San Phillippo syndrome) progressive worsening of intellectual function. After early childhood  ̂the disorder is generally lifelong, although severity levels may change over time. The course may be influenced by underlying medical or genetic conditions and co-occurring conditions (e.g., hearing or visual impairments, epilepsy). Early and ongoing in­terventions may improve adaptive functioning throughout childhood and adulthood. In some cases, these result in significant improvement of intellectual functioning, such that the diagnosis of intellectual disability is no longer appropriate. Thus, it is common practice when assessing infants and young children to delay diagnosis of intellectual disability un­til after an appropriate course of intervention is provided. For older children and adults, the extent of support provided may allow for full participation in all activities of daily liv­ing and improved adaptive function. Diagnostic assessments must determine whether im­proved adaptive skills are the result of a stable, generalized new skill acquisition (in which case the diagnosis of intellectual disability may no longer be appropriate) or whether the improvement is contingent on the presence of supports and ongoing interventions (in which case the diagnosis of intellectual disability may still be appropriate).Risk and Prognostic FactorsGenetic and physiological. Prenatal etiologies include genetic syndromes (e.g., se­quence variations or copy number variants involving one or more genes; chromosomal disorders), inborn errors of metabolism, brain malformations, maternal disease (including placental disease), and environmental influences (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, toxins, terato­gens). Perinatal causes include a variety of labor and delivery-related events leading to neonatal encephalopathy. Postnatal causes include hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic brain injury, infections, demyelinating disorders, seizure disorders (e.g., infantile spasms), severe and chronic social deprivation, and toxic metabolic syndromes and intoxications 
(e.g., lead, mercury).Culture-Reiated Diagnostic issuesIntellectual disability occurs in all races and cultures. Cultural sensitivity and knowledge are needed during assessment, and the individual's ethnic, cultural, and linguistic back­ground, available experiences, and adaptive functioning within his or her community and cultural setting must be taken into account.Gender-Reiated Diagnostic issuesOverall, males are more likely than females to be diagnosed with both mild (average maleifemale ratio 1.6:1) and severe (average male:female ratio 1.2:1) forms of intellectual disability. However, gender ratios vary widely in reported studies. Sex-linked genetic fac­tors and male vulnerability to brain insult may accoimt for some of the gender differences.Diagnostic iVlaricersA comprehensive evaluation includes an assessment of intellectual capacity and adaptive functioning; identification of genetic and nongenetic etiologies; evaluation for associated medical conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, seizure disorder); and evaluation for co-occurring mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Components of the evaluation may include basic pre- and perinatal medical history, three-generational family pedigree, physical exam­ination, genetic evaluation (e.g., karyotype or chromosomal microarray analysis and testing for specific genetic syndromes), and metabolic screening and neuroimaging assessment.Differential DiagnosisThe diagnosis of intellectual disability should be made whenever Criteria A, B, and C are met. A diagnosis of intellectual disability should not be assumed because of a particulargenetic or medical condition. A genetic syndrome linked to intellectual disability should be noted as a concurrent diagnosis with the intellectual disability.Major and mild neurocognitive disorders. Intellectual disability is categorized as a neu­rodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are characterized by a loss of cognitive functioning. Major neurocognitive disorder may co­occur with intellectual disability (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops Alzheimer's disease, or an individual with intellectual disability who loses further cogni­tive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual disability and neurocognitive disorder may both be given.Communication disorders and specific learning disorder. These neurodevelopmental disorders are specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show defi­cits in intellectual and adaptive behavior. They may co-occur with intellectual disability. Both diagnoses are made if full criteria are met for intellectual disability and a communi­cation disorder or specific learning disorder.Autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual disability is common among individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by so- cial-communication and behavior deficits inherent to autism spectrum disorder, which may interfere with understanding and complying with test procedures. Appropriate as­sessment of intellectual functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reas­sessment across the developmental period, because IQ scores in autism spectrum disorder may be unstable, particularly in early childhood.ComorbidityCo-occurring mental, neurodevelopmental, medical, and physical conditions are frequent in intellectual disability, with rates of some conditions (e.g., mental disorders, cerebral palsy, and epilepsy) three to four times higher than in the general population. The prognosis and outcome of co-occurring diagnoses may be influenced by the presence of intellectual disability. Assessment procedures may require modifications because of associated disor­ders, including communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, and motor, sensory, or other disorders. Knowledgeable informants are essential for identifying symptoms such as irritability, mood dysregulation, aggression, eating problems, and sleep problems, and for assessing adaptive functioning in various community settings.The most common co-occurring mental and neurodevelopmental disorders are atten- tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; anxiety disorders; autism spectrum disorder; stereotypic movement disorder (with or without self-injurious behavior); impulse-control disorders; and major neurocognitive disorder. Major depres­sive disorder may occur throughout the range of severity of intellectual disability. Self- injurious behavior requires prompt diagnostic attention and may warrant a separate di­agnosis of stereotypic movement disorder. Individuals with intellectual disability, partic­ularly those with more severe intellectual disability, may also exhibit aggression and disruptive behaviors, including harm of others or property destruction.Reiationship to Other ClassificationsICD-11 (in development at the time of this publication) uses the term intellectual develop­mental disorders to indicate that these are disorders that involve impaired brain functioning early in life. These disorders are described in ICD-11 as a metasyndrome occurring in the developmental period analogous to dementia or neurocognitive disorder in later life. There are four subtypes in ICD-11: mild, moderate, severe, and profound.The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD) also uses the term intellectual disability with a similar meaning to the term as used in thismanual. The AAIDD's classification is multidimensional rather than categorical and is based on the disability construct. Rather than listing specifiers as is done in DSM-5, the AAIDD emphasizes a profile of supports based on severity.Global Developmental Delay315.8 (F88)This diagnosis is reserved for individuals under the age of 5 years when the clinical severity level cannot be reliably assessed during early childhood. This category is diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones in several areas of intellec­tual functioning, and applies to individuals who are unable to undergo systematic assess­ments of intellectual functioning, including children who are too young to participate in standardized testing. This category requires reassessment after a period of time.Unspecified Intellectual Disability 
(Intellectual Developmental Disorder)319 (F79)This category is reserved for individuals over the age of 5 years when assessment of the degree of intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) by means of locally available procedures is rendered difficult or impossible because of associated sensory or physical impairments, as in blindness or prelingual deafness; locomotor disability; or pres­ence of severe problem behaviors or co-occurring mental disorder. This category should only be used in exceptional circumstances and requires reassessment after a period of time.Communication DisordersDisorders of communication include deficits in language, speech, and communication. Speech is the expressive production of sounds and includes an individual's articulation, fluency, voice, and resonance quality. Language includes the form, function, and use of a conventional system of symbols (i.e., spoken words, sign language, written words, pic­tures) in a rule-governed manner for communication. Communication includes any verbal or nonverbal behavior (whether intentional or unintentional) that influences the behavior, ideas, or attitudes of another individual. Assessments of speech, language and communi­cation abilities must take into account the individual’s cultural and language context, particularly for individuals growing up in bilingual environments. The standardized mea­sures of language development and of nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for the cultural and linguistic group (i.e., tests developed and standardized for one group may not provide appropriate norms for a different group). The diagnostic category of commu­nication disorders includes the following: language disorder, speech sound disorder, childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering), social (pragmatic) communication disor­der, and other specified and unspecified communication disorders.
