##i Introduction to Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders

Somatic symptom disorder and other disorders with prominent somatic symptoms constitute a new category in DSM-5 called somatic symptom and related disorders. This chapter includes the diagnoses of somatic symptom disorder, illness anxiety disorder, conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder), psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, factitious disorder, other specified somatic sjnnptom and related disorder, and unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder. All of the disorders in this chapter share a common feature: the prominence of somatic symptoms associated with significant distress and impairment. Individuals with disorders with prominent somatic symptoms are commonly encoimtered in primary care and other medical settings but are less commonly encountered in psychiatric and otiier mental health settings. These reconceptualized diagnoses, based on a reorganization of DSM-IV somatoform disorder diagnoses, are more useful for primary care and other medical (nonpsychiatric) clinicians.

The major diagnosis in this diagnostic class, somatic symptom disorder, emphasizes diagnosis made on the basis of positive symptoms and signs (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response to these symptoms) rather than the absence of a medical explanation for somatic symptoms. A distinctive characteristic of many individuals with somatic symptom disorder is not the somatic symptoms per se, but instead the way they present and interpret them. Incorporating affective, cognitive, and behavioral components into the criteria for somatic symptom disorder provides a more comprehensive and accurate reflection of the true clinical picture than can be achieved by assessing the somatic complaints alone.

The principles behind the changes in the somatic symptom and related diagnoses from DSM-IV are crucial in imderstanding the DSM-5 diagnoses. The DSM-IV term somatoform disorders was confusing and is replaced by somatic symptom and related disorders. In DSM-IV there was a great deal of overlap across the somatoform disorders and a lack of clarity about the boundaries of diagnoses. Although individuals with these disorders primarily present in medical rather than mental health settings, nonpsychiatric physicians foimd the DSM-IV somatoform diagnoses difficult to understand and use. The current DSM-5 classification recogrüzes this overlap by reducing the total number of disorders as well as their subcategories.

The previous criteria overemphasized the centrality of medically unexplained symptoms.

Such symptoms are present to various degrees, particularly in conversion disorder, but somatic symptom disorders can also accompany diagnosed medical disorders. The reliability of determining that a somatic symptom is medically unexplained is limited, and grounding a diagnosis on the absence of an explanation is problematic and reinforces mind-body dualism. It is not appropriate to give an individual a mental disorder diagnosis solely because a medical cause cannot be demonstrated. Furthermore, the presence of a medical diagnosis does not exclude the possibility of a comorbid mental disorder, including a somatic symptom and related disorder. Perhaps because of the predominant focus on lack of medical explanation, individuals regarded these diagnoses as pejorative and demeaning, implying that their physical symptoms were not "real." The new classification defines the major diagnosis, somatic symptom disorder, on the basis of positive symptoms (distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in responseto these symptoms). However, medically unexplained symptoms remain a key feature in conversion disorder and pseudocyesis (other specified somatic symptom and related disorder) because it is possible to demonstrate definitively in such disorders that the symptoms are not consistent with medical pathophysiology.

It is important to note that some other mental disorders may initially manifest with primarily somatic symptoms (e.g., major depressive disorder, panic disorder). Such diagnoses may account for the somatic symptoms, or they may occur alongside one of the somatic symptom and related disorders in this chapter. There is also considerable medical comorbidity among somatizing individuals. Although somatic symptoms are frequently associated with psychological distress and psychopathology, some somatic symptom and related disorders can arise spontaneously, and their causes can remain obscure. Anxiety disorders and depressive disorders may accompany somatic symptom and related disorders. The somatic component adds severity and complexity to depressive and anxiety disorders and results in higher severity, functional impairment, and even refractoriness to traditional treatments. In rare instances, the degree of preoccupation may be so severe as to warrant consideration of a delusional disorder diagnosis.

A number of factors may contribute to somatic symptom and related disorders. These include genetic and biological vulnerability (e.g., increased sensitivity to pain), early traumatic experiences (e.g., violence, abuse, deprivation), and learning (e.g., attention obtained from illness, lack of reinforcement of nonsomatic expressions of distress), as well as cultural/social norms that devalue and stigmatize psychological suffering as compared with physical suffering. Differences in medical care across cultures affect the presentation, recognition, and management of these somatic presentations. Variations in symptom presentation are likely the result of the interaction of multiple factors within cultural contexts that affect how individuals identify and classify bodily sensations, perceive illness, and seek medical attention for them. Thus, somatic presentations can be viewed as expressions of personal suffering inserted in a cultural and social context.

All of these disorders are characterized by the prominent focus on somatic concerns and their iiütial presentation mainly in medical rather than mental health care settings. Somatic symptom disorder offers a more clinically useful method of characterizing individuals who may have been considered in the past for a diagnosis of somatization disorder.

Furthermore, approximately 75% of individuals previously diagnosed with hypochondriasis are subsumed under the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. However, about 25% of individuals with hypochondriasis have high health anxiety in the absence of somatic symptoms, and many such individuals' symptoms would not qualify for an anxiety disorder diagnosis. The DSM-5 diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is for this latter group of individuals. Illness anxiety disorder can be considered either in this diagnostic section or as an anxiety disorder. Because of the strong focus on somatic concerns, and because illness anxiety disorder is most often encountered in medical settings, for utility it is listed with the somatic symptom and related disorders. In conversion disorder, the essential feature is neurological symptoms that are found, after appropriate neurological assessment, to be incompatible with neurological pathophysiology. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is also included in this chapter. Its essential feature is the presence of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability. Like the other somatic symptom and related disorders, factitious disorder embodies persistent problems related to illness perception and identity. In the great majority of reported cases of factitious disorder, both imposed on self and imposed on another, individuals present with somatic symptoms and medical disease conviction. Consequently, DSM-5 factitious disorder is included among the somatic symptom and related disorders. Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder and unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder include conditions for which some, but not all, of the criteria for somatic symptom disorder or illness anxiety disorder are met, as well as pseudocyesis.

##d Somatic symptom disorder <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

300.82 (F45.1)

##h Diagnostic Criteria <--@HEADER-->

A. One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life.

B. Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns as manifested by at least one of the following:

1. Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one’s symptoms.

2. Persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms.

3. Excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.

C. Although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously present, the state of being symptomatic is persistent (typically more than 6 months).

_Specify_ if:

With predominant pain (previously pain disorder): This specifier is for individuals whose somatic symptoms predominantly involve pain.

_Specify_ if:

Persistent: A persistent course is characterized by severe symptoms, marked impairment, and long duration (more than 6 months).

_Specify_ current severity:

Mild: Only one of the symptoms specified in Criterion B is fulfilled.

Moderate: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled.

Severe: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled, plus there are multiple somatic complaints (or one very severe somatic symptom).

##h Diagnostic Features <--@HEADER-->

Individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically have multiple, current, somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life (Criterion A), although sometimes only one severe symptom, most commonly pain, is present. Symptoms may be specific (e.g., localized pain) or relatively nonspecific (e.g., fatigue). The symptoms sometimes represent normal bodily sensations or discomfort that does not generally signify serious disease. Somatic symptoms without an evident medical explanation are not sufficient to make this diagnosis. The individual's suffering is authentic, whether or not it is medically explained.

The symptoms may or may not be associated with another medical condition. The diagnoses of somatic symptom disorder and a concurrent medical illness are not mutually exclusive, and these frequently occur together. For example, an individual may become seriously disabled by symptoms of somatic symptom disorder after an uncomplicated myocardial infarction even if the myocardial infarction itself did not result in any disability. If another medical condition or high risk for developing one is present (e.g., strong family history), the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors associated with this condition are excessive (Criterion B).

Individuals with somatic symptom disorder tend to have very high levels of worry about illness (Criterion B). They appraise their bodily symptoms as unduly threatening, harmful, or troublesome and often think the worst about their health. Even when there is evidence to the contrary, some patients still fear the medical seriousness of their symptoms. In severe somatic symptom disorder, health concerns may assume a central role in the individual's life, becoming a feature of his or her identity and dominating interpersonal relationships.

Individuals typically experience distress that is principally focused on somatic symptoms and their significance. When asked directly about their distress, some individuals describe it in relation to other aspects of their lives, while others deny any source of distress other than the somatic symptoms. Health-related quality of life is often impaired, both physically and mentally. In severe somatic symptom disorder, the impairment is marked, and when persistent, the disorder can lead to invalidism.

There is often a high level of medical care utilization, which rarely alleviates the individual's concerns. Consequently, the patient may seek care from multiple doctors for the same symptoms. These individuals often seem unresponsive to medical interventions, and new interventions may only exacerbate the presenting symptoms. Some individuals with the disorder seem unusually sensitive to medication side effects. Some feel that their medical assessment and treatment have been inadequate.

##h Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Cognitive features include attention focused on somatic symptoms, attribution of normal bodily sensations to physical illness (possibly with catastrophic interpretations), worry about illness, and fear that any physical activity may damage the body. The relevant associated behavioral features may include repeated bodily checking for abnormalities, repeated seeking of medical help and reassurance, and avoidance of physical activity. These behavioral features are most pronounced in severe, persistent somatic symptom disorder.

These features are usually associated with frequent requests for medical help for different somatic symptoms. This may lead to medical consultations in which individuals are so focused on their concerns about somatic symptom(s) that they cannot be redirected to other matters. Any reassurance by the doctor that the symptoms are not indicative of serious physical illness tends to be short-lived and/or is experienced by the individuals as the doctor not taking their symptoms with due seriousness. As the focus on somatic symptoms is a primary feature of the disorder, individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically present to general medical health services rather than mental health services. The suggestion of referral to a mental health specialist may be met with surprise or even frank refusal by individuals with somatic symptom disorder.

Since somatic symptom disorder is associated with depressive disorders, there is an increased suicide risk. It is not known whether somatic symptom disorder is associated with suicide risk independent of its association with depressive disorders.

##h Prevalence <--@HEADER-->

The prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is not known. However, the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is expected to be higher than that of the more restrictive DSM- IV somatization disorder (<1%) but lower than that of undifferentiated somatoform disorder (approximately 19%). The prevalence of somatic symptom disorder in the general adult population may be around 5%-7%. Females tend to report more somatic symptoms than do males, and the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is consequently likely to be higher in females.

##h Development and Course <--@HEADER-->

In older individuals, somatic symptoms and concurrent medical illnesses are common, and a focus on Criterion B is crucial for making the diagnosis. Somatic symptom disorder may be underdiagnosed in older adults either because certain somatic symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue) are considered part of normal aging or because illness worry is considered "understandable" in older adults who have more general medical illnesses and medications than do younger people. Concurrent depressive disorder is common in older people who present with numerous somatic symptoms.

In children, the most common symptoms are recurrent abdominal pain, headache, fatigue, and nausea. A single prominent symptom is more common in children than in adults. While young children may have somatic complaints, they rarely worry about "illness" per se prior to adolescence. The parents' response to the symptom is important, as this may determine the level of associated distress. It is the parent who may determine the interpretation of symptoms and the associated time off school and medical help seeking.

##h Risk and Prognostic Factors <--@HEADER-->

Temperamental. The personality trait of negative affectivity (neuroticism) has been identified as an independent correlate/risk factor of a high number of somatic symptoms. Comorbid anxiety or depression is common and may exacerbate symptoms and impairment.

Environmental. Somatic symptom disorder is more frequent in individuals with few years of education and low socioeconomic status, and in those who have recently experienced stressful life events.

Course modifiers. Persistent somatic symptoms are associated with demographic features (female sex, older age, fewer years of education, lower socioeconomic status, unemployment), a reported history of sexual abuse or other childhood adversity, concurrent chronic physical illness or psychiatric disorder (depression, anxiety, persistent depressive disorder [dysthymia], panic), social stress, and reinforcing social factors such as illness benefits. Cognitive factors that affect clinical course include sensitization to pain, heightened attention to bodily sensations, and attribution of bodily symptoms to a possible medical illness rather than recognizing them as a normal phenomenon or psychological stress.

##h Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues <--@HEADER-->

Somatic sjmnptoms are prominent in various "culture-bound syndromes." High numbers of somatic symptoms are found in population-based and primary care studies aroimd the world, with a similar pattern of the most commonly reported somatic symptoms, impairment, and treatment seeking. The relationship between number of somatic symptoms and illness worry is similar in different cultures, and marked illness worry is associated with impairment and greater treatment seeking across cultures. The relationship between numerous somatic symptoms and depression appears to be very similar around the world and between different cultures within one country.

Despite these similarities, there are differences in somatic symptoms among cultures and ethnic groups. The description of somatic symptoms varies with linguistic and other local cultural factors. These somatic presentations have been described as "idioms of distress" because somatic symptoms may have special meanings and shape patient-clinician interactions in the particular cultural contexts. "Burnout," the sensation of heaviness or the complaints of "gas"; too much heat in the body; or burning in the head are examples of symptoms that are common in some cultures or ethnic groups but rare in others. Explanatory models also vary, and somatic symptoms may be attributed variously to particular family, work, or environmental stresses; general medical illness; the suppression of feelings of anger and resentment; or certain culture-specific phenomena, such as semen loss.

There may also be differences in medical treatment seeking among cultural groups, in addition to differences due to variable access to medical care services. Seeking treatment for multiple somatic symptoms in general medical clinics is a worldwide phenomenon and occurs at similar rates among ethnic groups in the same country.

##h Functional Consequences of Somatic Symptom Disorder <--@HEADER-->

The disorder is associated with marked impairment of health status. Many individuals with severe somatic symptom disorder are likely to have impaired health status scores more than 2 standard deviations below population norms.

##h Differential Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

If the somatic symptoms are consistent with another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder), and the diagnostic criteria for that disorder are fulfilled, then that mental disorder should be considered as an alternative or additional diagnosis. A separate diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder is not made if the somatic symptoms and related thoughts, feelings, or behaviors occur only during major depressive episodes. If, as commonly occurs, the criteria for both somatic symptom disorder and another mental disorder diagnosis are fulfilled, then both should be coded, as both may require treatment.

Other medical conditions. The presence of somatic symptoms of unclear etiology is not in itself sufficient to make the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. The symptoms of many individuals with disorders like irritable bowel syndrome or fibromyalgia would not satisfy the criterion necessary to diagnose somatic symptom disorder (Criterion B). Conversely, the presence of somatic symptoms of an established medical disorder (e.g., diabetes or heart disease) does not exclude the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder if the criteria are otherwise met.

Panic disorder. In panic disorder, somatic symptoms and anxiety about health tend to occur in acute episodes, whereas in somatic symptom disorder, anxiety and somatic symptoms are more persistent.

Generalized anxiety disorder. Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry about multiple events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health. The main focus is not usually somatic symptoms or fear of illness as it is in somatic symptom disorder.

Depressive disorders. Depressive disorders are commonly accompanied by somatic symptoms. However, depressive disorders are differentiated from somatic symptom disorder by the core depressive symptoms of low (dysphoric) mood and anhedonia.

Illness anxiety disorder. If the individual has extensive worries about health but no or minimal somatic symptoms, it may be more appropriate to consider illness anxiety disorder.

Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). In conversion disorder, the presenting symptom is loss of function (e.g., of a limb), whereas in somatic symptom disorder, the focus is on the distress that particular symptoms cause. The features listed under Criterion B of somatic symptom disorder may be helpful in differentiating the two disorders.

Delusional disorder. In somatic symptom disorder, the individual's beliefs that somatic symptoms might reflect serious underlying physical illness are not held with delusional intensity. Nonetheless, the individual's beliefs concerning the somatic symptoms can be firmly held. In contrast, in delusional disorder, somatic subtype, the somatic symptom beliefs and behavior are stronger than those found in somatic symptom disorder.

Body dysmorphic disorder. In body dysmorphic disorder, the individual is excessively concerned about, and preoccupied by, a perceived defect in his or her physical features. In contrast, in somatic symptom disorder, the concern about somatic symptoms reflects fear of underlying illness, not of a defect in appearance.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In somatic symptom disorder, the recurrent ideas about somatic symptoms or illness are less intrusive, and individuals with this disorder do not exhibit the associated repetitive behaviors aimed at reducing anxiety that occur in obsessive-compulsive disorder.

##h Comorbidity <--@HEADER-->

Somatic symptom disorder is associated with high rates of comorbidity with medical disorders as well as anxiety and depressive disorders. When a concurrent medical illness ispresent, the degree of impairment is more marked than would be expected from the physical illness alone. When an individual's symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for somatic symptom disorder, the disorder should be diagnosed; however, in view of the frequent comorbidity, especially with anxiety and depressive disorders, evidence for these concurrent diagnoses should be sought.

##d Illness anxiety disorder <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

300.7 (F45.21)

##h Diagnostic Criteria <--@HEADER-->

A. Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.

B. Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are only mild in intensity. If another medical condition is present or there is a high risk for developing a medical condition (e.g., strong family history is present), the preoccupation is clearly excessive or disproportionate.

C. There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the individual is easily alarmed about personal health status.

D. The individual performs excessive health-related behaviors (e.g., repeatedly checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits maladaptive avoidance (e.g., avoids doctor appointments and hospitals).

E. Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but the specific illness that is feared may change over that period of time.

F. The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or delusional disorder, somatic type.

_Specify_ whether:

Care-seeking type: Medical care, including physician visits or undergoing tests and procedures, is frequently used.

Care-avoidant type: Medical care is rarely used.

##h Diagnostic Features <--@HEADER-->

Most individuals with hypochondriasis are now classified as having somatic symptom disorder; however, in a minority of cases, the diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder applies instead. Illness anxiety disorder entails a preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious, undiagnosed medical illness (Criterion A). Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are only mild in intensity (Criterion B). A thorough evaluation fails to identify a serious medical condition that accounts for the individual's concerns. While the concern may be derived from a nonpathological physical sign or sensation, the individual's distress emanates not primarily from the physical complaint itself but rather from his or her anxiety about the meaning, significance, or cause of the complaint (i.e., the suspected medical diagnosis). If a physical sign or symptom is present, it is often a normal physiological sensation (e.g., orthostatic dizziness), a benign and self-limited dysfunction (e.g., transient tinnitus), or a bodily discomfort not generally considered indicative of disease (e.g., belching). If a diagnosable medical condition is present, the individual's anxiety and preoccupation are clearly excessive and disproportionate to the severity of the condition (Criterion B). Empirical evidence and existing literature pertain to previously defined DSM hypochondriasis, and it is unclear to what extent and how precisely they apply to the description of this new diagnosis.

The preoccupation with the idea that one is sick is accompanied by substantial anxiety about health and disease (Criterion C). Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are easilyalarmed about illness, such as by hearing about someone else falling ill or reading a health- related news story. Their concerns about undiagnosed disease do not respond to appropriate medical reassurance, negative diagnostic tests, or benign course. The physician's attempts at reassurance and symptom palliation generally do not alleviate the individual's concerns and may heighten them. Illness concerns assume a prominent place in the individual's life, affecting daily activities, and may even result in invalidism. Illness becomes a central feature of the individual's identity and self-image, a frequent topic of social discourse, and a characteristic response to stressful life events. Individuals with the disorder often examine themselves repeatedly (e.g., examining one's throat in the mirror) (Criterion D). They research their suspected disease excessively (e.g., on the Internet) and repeatedly seek reassurance from family, friends, or physicians. This incessant worrying often becomes frustrating for others and may result in considerable strain within the family. In some cases, the anxiety leads to maladaptive avoidance of situations (e.g., visiting sick family members) or activities (e.g., exercise) that these individuals fear might jeopardize their health.

##h Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Because they believe they are medically ill, individuals with illness anxiety disorder are encountered far more frequently in medical than in mental health settings. The majority of individuals with illness anxiety disorder have extensive yet unsatisfactory medical care, though some may be too anxious to seek medical attention. They generally have elevated rates of medical utilization but do not utilize mental health services more than the general population. They often consult multiple physicians for the same problem and obtain repeatedly negative diagnostic test results. At times, medical attention leads to a paradoxical exacerbation of anxiety or to iatrogenic complications from diagnostic tests and procedures. Individuals with the disorder are generally dissatisfied with their medical care and find it unhelpful, often feeling they are not being taken seriously by physicians. At times, these concerns may be justified, since physicians sometimes are dismissive or respond with frustration or hostility. This response can occasionally result in a failure to diagnose a medical condition that is present.

##h Prevalence <--@HEADER-->

Prevalence estimates of illness anxiety disorder are based on estimates of the DSM-III and

DSM-rV diagnosis hypochondriasis. The 1- to 2-year prevalence of health anxiety and/or disease conviction in community surveys and population-based samples ranges fiOm 1.3% to 10%. In ambulatory medical populations, the 6-month/1-year prevalence rates are between 3% and 8%. The prevalence of the disorder is similar in males and females.

##h Development and Course <--@HEADER-->

The development and course of illness anxiety disorder are unclear. Illness anxiety disorder is generally thought to be a chronic and relapsing condition with an age at onset in early and middle adulthood. In population-based samples, health-related anxiety increases with age, but the ages of individuals with high health anxiety in medical settings do not appear to differ from those of other patients in those settings. In older individuals, health-related anxiety often focuses on memory loss; the disorder is thought to be rare in children.

##h Risk and Prognostic Factors <--@HEADER-->

Environmental. Illness anxiety disorder may sometimes be precipitated by a major life stress or a serious but ultimately benign threat to the individual's health. A history of childhood abuse or of a serious childhood ilhiess may predispose to development of the disorder in adulthood^ Course modifiers. Approximately one-third to one-half of individuals with illness anxiety disorder have a transient form, which is associated with less psychiatric comorbidity, more medical comorbidity, and less severe illness aiixiety disorder.

##h Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues <--@HEADER-->

The diagnosis should be made with caution in individuals whose ideas about disease are congruent with widely held, culturally sanctioned beliefs. Little is known about the phenomenology of the disorder across cultures, although the prevalence appears to be similar across different countries with diverse cultures.

##h Functional Consequences of Illness Anxiety Disorder <--@HEADER-->

Illness anxiety disorder causes substantial role impairment and decrements in physical function and health-related quality of life. Health concerns often interfere with interpersonal relationships, disrupt family life, and damage occupational performance.

##h Differential Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Other medical conditions. The first differential diagnostic consideration is an underlying medical condition, including neurological or endocrine conditions, occult malignancies, and other diseases that affect multiple body systems. The presence of a medical condition does not rule out the possibility of coexisting illness anxiety disorder. If a medical condition is present, the health-related anxiety and disease concerns are clearly disproportionate to its seriousness. Transient preoccupations related to a medical condition do not constitute illness anxiety disorder.

Adjustment disorders. Health-related anxiety is a normal response to serious illness and is not a mental disorder. Such nonpathological health anxiety is clearly related to the medical condition and is typically time-limited. If the health anxiety is severe enough, an adjustment disorder may be diagnosed. However, only when the health anxiety is of sufficient duration, severity, and distress can illness anxiety disorder be diagnosed. Thus, the diagnosis requires the continuous persistence of disproportionate health-related anxiety for at least 6 months.

Somatic symptom disorder. Somatic symptom disorder is diagnosed when significant somatic symptoms are present. In contrast, individuals with illness anxiety disorder have minimal somatic symptoms and are primarily concerned with the idea they are ill.

Anxiety disorders. In generalized anxiety disorder, individuals worry about multiple events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve health. In panic disorder, the individual may be concerned that the panic attacks reflect the presence of a medical illness; however, although these individuals may have health anxiety, their anxiety is typically very acute and episodic. In illness anxiety disorder, the health anxiety and fears are more persistent and enduring. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may experience panic attacks that are triggered by their illness concerns.

Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have intrusive thoughts about having a disease and also may have associated compulsive behaviors (e.g., seeking reassurance). However, in illness anxiety disorder, the preoccupations are usually focused on having a disease, whereas in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the thoughts are intrusive and are usually focused on fears of getting a disease in the future. Most individuals with OCD have obsessions or compulsions involving other concerns in addition to fears about contracting disease. In body dysmorphic dis-order, concerns are limited to the individual's physical appearance, which is viewed as defective or flawed.

Major depressive disorder. Some individuals with a major depressive episode ruminate about their health and worry excessively about illness. A separate diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is not made if these concerns occur only during major depressive episodes. However, if excessive illness worry persists after remission of an episode of major depressive disorder, the diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder should be considered.

Psychotic disorders. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are not delusional and can acknowledge the possibility that the feared disease is not present. Their ideas do not attain the rigidity and intensity seen in the somatic delusions occurring in psychotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia; delusional disorder, somatic type; major depressive disorder, with psychotic features). True somatic delusions are generally more bizarre (e.g., that an organ is rotting or dead) than the concerns seen in illness anxiety disorder. The concerns seen in illness anxiety disorder, though not founded in reality, are plausible.

##h Comorbidity <--@HEADER-->

Because illness anxiety disorder is a new disorder, exact comorbidities are unknown. Hypochondriasis co-occurs with anxiety disorders (in particular, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and OCD) and depressive disorders. Approximately two-thirds of individuals with illness anxiety disorder are likely to have at least one other comorbid major mental disorder. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have an elevated risk for somatic symptom disorder and personality disorders.

##d Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

##h Diagnostic Criteria <--@HEADER-->

A. One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function.

B. Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and recognized neurological or medical conditions.

C. The symptom or deficit is not better explained by another medical or mental disorder.

D. The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or warrants medical evaluation.

Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for conversion disorder is 300.11, which is assigned regardless of the symptom type. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the symptom type (see below).

_Specify_ symptom type:

(F44.4) With wealcness or paralysis (F44.4) With abnormal movement (e.g., tremor, dystonie movement, myoclonus, gait disorder)

(F44.4) With swallowing symptoms (F44.4) With speech symptom (e.g., dysphonia, slurred speech)

(F44.5) With attacks or seizures (F44.6) With anesthesia or sensory loss (F44.6) With special sensory symptom (e.g., visual, olfactory, or hearing disturbance)

(F44.7) With mixed symptoms _Specify_ if:

Acute episode; Symptoms present for less than 6 months.

Persistent: Symptoms occurring for 6 months or more.

_Specify_ if:

With psychological stressor (specify stressor)

Without psychological stressor

##h Diagnostic Features <--@HEADER-->

Many clinicians use the alternative names of "functional" (referring to abnormal central nervous system functioning) or "psychogenic" (referring to an assumed etiology) to describe the symptoms of conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). In conversion disorder, there may be one or more symptoms of various types. Motor symptoms include weakness or paralysis; abnormal movements, such as tremor or dystonie movements; gait abnormalities; and abnormal limb posturing. Sensory symptoms include altered, reduced, or absent skin sensation, vision, or hearing. Episodes of abnormal generalized limb shaking with apparent impaired or loss of consciousness may resemble epileptic seizures (also called psychogenic or non-epileptic seizures). There may be episodes of unresponsiveness resembling syncope or coma. Other symptoms include reduced or absent speech volume (dysphonia/aphonia), altered articulation (dysarthria), a sensation of a lump in the throat (globus), and diplopia.

Although the diagnosis requires that the symptom is not explained by neurological disease, it should not be made simply because results from investigations are normal or because the symptom is "bizarre." There must be clinical findings that show clear evidence of incompatibility with neurological disease. Internal inconsistency at examination is one way to demonstrate incompatibility (i.e., demonstrating that physical signs elicited through one examination method are no longer positive when tested a different way). Examples of such examination findings include
• Hoover's sign, in which weakness of hip extension returns to normal strength with contralateral hip flexion against resistance.
• Marked weakness of ankle plantar-flexion when tested on the bed in an individual who is able to walk on tiptoes;
• Positive findings on the tremor entrainment test. On this test, a unilateral tremor may be identified as functional if the tremor changes when the individual is distracted away from it. This may be observed if the individual is asked to copy the examiner in making a rhythmical movement with their unaffected hand and this causes the functional tremor to change such that it copies or "entrains" to the rhythm of the unaffected hand or the functional tremor is suppressed, or no longer makes a simple rhythmical movement.
• In attacks resembling epilepsy or syncope ("psychogenic" non-epileptic attacks), the occurrence of closed eyes with resistance to opening or a normal simultaneous electroencephalogram (although this alone does not exclude all forms of epilepsy or syncope).
• For visual symptoms, a tubular visual field (i.e., tunnel vision).

It is important to note that the diagnosis of conversion disorder should be based on the overall clinical picture and not on a single clinical finding.

##h Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

A number of associated features can support the diagnosis of conversion disorder. There may be a history of multiple similar somatic symptoms. Onset may be associated with stress or trauma, either psychological or physical in nature. The potential etiological relevance of this stress or trauma may be suggested by a close temporal relationship. However, while assessment for stress and trauma is important, the diagnosis should not be withheld if none is found.

Conversion disorder is often associated with dissociative symptoms, such as depersonalization, derealization, and dissociative amnesia, particularly at symptom onset or during attacks.

The diagnosis of conversion disorder does not require the judgment that the symptoms are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned), as the definite absence of feigning may not be reliably discerned. The phenomenon of la belle indifférence (i.e., lack of concern about the nature or implications of the symptom) has been associated with conversion disorder but it is not specific for conversion disorder and should not be used to make the diagnosis.

Similarly the concept of secondary gain (i.e., when individuals derive external benefits such as money or release from responsibilities) is also not specific to conversion disorder and particularly in the context of definite evidence for feigning, the diagnoses that should be considered instead would include factitious disorder or malingering (see the section "Differential Diagnosis" for this disorder).

##h Prevalence <--@HEADER-->

Transient conversion symptoms are common, but the precise prevalence of the disorder is unknown. This is partly because the diagnosis usually requires assessment in secondary care, where it is found in approximately 5% of referrals to neurology clinics. The incidence of individual persistent conversion symptoms is estimated to be 2-5/100,000 per year.

##h Development and Course <--@HEADER-->

Onset has been reported throughout the life course. The onset of non-epileptic attacks peaks in the third decade, and motor symptoms have their peak onset in the fourth decade.

The symptoms can be transient or persistent. The prognosis may be better in younger children than in adolescents and adults.

##h Risk and Prognostic Factors <--@HEADER-->

Temperamental. Maladaptive personality traits are commonly associated with conversion disorder.

Environmental. There may be a history of childhood abuse and neglect. Stressful life events are often, but not always, present.

Genetic and physiological. The presence of neurological disease that causes similar symptoms is a risk factor (e.g., non-epileptic seizures are more common in patients who also have epilepsy).

Course modifiers. Short duration of symptoms and acceptance of the diagnosis are positive prognostic factors. Maladaptive personality traits, the presence of comorbid physical disease, and the receipt of disability benefits may be negative prognostic factors.

##h Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues <--@HEADER-->

Changes resembling conversion (and dissociative) symptoms are common in certain culturally sanctioned rituals. If the symptoms are fully explained within the particular cultural context and do not result in clinically significant distress or disability, then the diagnosis of conversion disorder is not made.

##h Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues <--@HEADER-->

Conversion disorder is two to three times more common in females.

##h Functional Consequences of Conversion Disorder <--@HEADER-->

Individuals with conversion symptoms may have substantial disability. The severity of disability can be similar to that experienced by individuals with comparable medical diseases.

##h Differential Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

If another mental disorder better explains the symptoms, that diagnosis should be made.

However the diagnosis of conversion disorder may be made in the presence of another mental disorder.

Neurological disease. The main differential diagnosis is neurological disease that might better explain the symptoms. After a thorough neurological assessment, an unexpected neurological disease cause for the symptoms is rarely found at follow up. However, reassessment may be required if the symptoms appear to be progressive. Conversion disorder may coexist with neurological disease.

Somatic symptom disorder. Conversion disorder may be diagnosed in addition to somatic symptom disorder. Most of the somatic symptoms encountered in somatic symptom disorder cannot be demonstrated to be clearly incompatible with pathophysiology (e.g., pain, fatigue), whereas in conversion disorder, such incompatibility is required for the diagnosis. The excessive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors characterizing somatic symptom disorder are often absent in conversion disorder.

Factitious disorder and malingering. The diagnosis of conversion disorder does not require the judgment that the symptoms are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned), because assessment of conscious intention is unreliable. However definite evidence of feigning (e.g., clear evidence that loss of function is present during the examination but not at home) would suggest a diagnosis of factitious disorder if the individual's apparent aim is to assume the sick role or malingering if the aim is to obtain an incentive such as money.

Dissociative disorders. Dissociative symptoms are common in individuals with conversion disorder. If both conversion disorder and a dissociative disorder are present, both diagnoses should be made.

Body dysmorphic disorder. Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are excessively concerned about a perceived defect in their physical features but do not complain of symptoms of sensory or motor functioning in the affected body part.

Depressive disorders. In depressive disorders, individuals may report general heaviness of their limbs, whereas the weakness of conversion disorder is more focal and prominent. Depressive disorders are also differentiated by the presence of core depressive symptoms.

Panic disorder. Episodic neurological symptoms (e.g., tremors and paresthesias) can occur in both conversion disorder and panic attacks. In panic attacks, the neurological symptoms are typically transient and acutely episodic with characteristic cardiorespiratory symptoms. Loss of awareness with amnesia for the attack and violent limb movements occur in non-epileptic attacks, but not in panic attacks.

##h Comorbidity <--@HEADER-->

Anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, and depressive disorders commonly co-occur with conversion disorder. Somatic symptom disorder may co-occur as well. Psychosis, substance use disorder, and alcohol misuse are uncommon. Personality disorders are more common in individuals with conversion disorder than in the general population. Neurological or other medical conditions commonly coexist with conversion disorder as well.

##d Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

316 (F54)

##h Diagnostic Criteria <--@HEADER-->

A. A medical symptom or condition (other than a mental disorder) is present.

B. Psychological or behavioral factors adversely affect the medical condition in one of the following ways:

1. The factors have influenced the course of the medical condition as shown by a close temporal association between the psychological factors and the development or exacerbation of, or delayed recovery from, the medical condition.

2. The factors interfere with the treatment of the medical condition (e.g., poor adherence).

3. The factors constitute additional well-established health risks for the individual.

4. The factors influence the underlying pathophysiology, precipitating or exacerbating symptoms or necessitating medical attention.

C. The psychological and behavioral factors in Criterion B are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder, major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder).

_Specify_ current severity:

Mild: Increases medical risk (e.g., inconsistent adherence with antihypertension treatment).

Moderate: Aggravates underlying medical condition (e.g., anxiety aggravating asthma).

Severe: Results in medical hospitalization or emergency room visit.

Extreme: Results in severe, life-threatening risk (e.g., ignoring heart attack symptoms).

##h Diagnostic Features <--@HEADER-->

The essential feature of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is the presence of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability (Criterion B). These factors can adversely affect the medical condition by influencing its course or treatment, by constituting an additional well-established health risk factor, or by influencing the underlying pathophysiology to precipitate or exacerbate symptoms or to necessitate medical attention.

Psychological or behavioral factors include psychological distress, patterns of interpersonal interaction, coping styles, and maladaptive health behaviors, such as denial of symptoms or poor adherence to medical recommendations. Common clinical examples are anxiety-exacerbating asthma, denial of need for treatment for acute chest pain, and manipulation of insulin by an individual v îth diabetes wishing to lose weight. Many different psychological factors have been demonstrated to adversely influence medical conditions— for example, symptoms of depression or anxiety, stressful life events, relationship style, personality traits, and coping styles. The adverse effects can range from acute, with immediate medical consequences (e.g., Takotsubo cardiomyopathy) to chronic, occurring over a long period of time (e.g., chronic occupational stress increasing risk for hypertension). Affected medical conditions can be those with clear pathophysiology (e.g., diabetes, cancer, coronary disease), functional syndromes (e.g., migraine, irritable bowel syndrome, fibromyalgia), or idiopathic medical symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue, dizziness).

This diagnosis should be reserved for situations in which the effect of the psychological factor on the medical condition is evident and the psychological factor has clinically significant effects on the course or outcome of the medical condition. Abnormal psychological or behavioral symptoms that develop in response to a medical condition are more properly coded as an adjustment disorder (a clinically significant psychological response to an identifiable stressor). There must be reasonable evidence to suggest an association between the psychological factors and the medical condition, although it may often not be possible to demonstrate direct causality or the mechanisms underlying the relationship.

##h Prevalence <--@HEADER-->

The prevalence of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is unclear. In U. S. private insurance billing data, it is a more common diagnosis than somatic symptom disorders.

##h Development and Course <--@HEADER-->

Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions can occur across the lifespan. Particularly with young children, corroborative history from parents or school can assist the diagnostic evaluation. Some conditions are characteristic of particular life stages (e.g., in older individuals, the stress associated with acting as a caregiver for an ill spouse or partner).

##h Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues <--@HEADER-->

Many differences between cultures may influence psychological factors and their effects on medical conditions, such as those in language and communication style, explanatory models of illness, patterns of seeking health care, service availability and organization, doctor-patient relationships and other healing practices, family and gender roles, and attitudes toward pain and death. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions must be differentiated from culturally specific behaviors such as using faith or spiritual healers or other variations in illness management that are acceptable within a culture and represent an attempt to help the medical condition rather than interfere with it. These local practices may complement rather than obstruct evidence-based interventions. If they do not adversely affect outcomes, they should not be pathologized as psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.

##h Functional Consequences of Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions <--@HEADER-->

Psychological and behavioral factors have been demonstrated to affect the course of many medical diseases.

##h Differential Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Mental disorder due to another medical condition. A temporal association between symptoms of a mental disorder and those of a medical condition is also characteristic of a mental disorder due to another medical condition, but the presumed causality is in the opposite direction. In a mental disorder due to another medical condition, the medical condition is judged to be causing the mental disorder through a direct physiological mechanism. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, the psychological or behavioral factors are judged to affect the course of the medical condition.

Adjustment disorders. Abnormal psychological or behavioral symptoms that develop in response to a medical condition are more properly coded as an adjustment disorder (a clinically significant psychological response to an identifiable stressor). For example, an individual with angina that is precipitated whenever he becomes enraged would be diagnosed as having psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, whereas an individual with angina who developed maladaptive anticipatory anxiety would be diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder with anxiety. In clinical practice, however, psychological factors and a medical condition are often mutually exacerbating (e.g., anxiety as both a precipitant and a consequence of angina), in which case the distinction is arbitrary. Other mental disorders frequently result in medical complications, most notably substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol use disorder, tobacco use disorder). If an individual has a coexisting major mental disorder that adversely affects or causes another medical condition, diagnoses of the mental disorder and the medical condition are usually sufficient. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is diagnosed when the psychological traits or behaviors do not meet criteria for a mental diagnosis.

Somatic symptom disorder. Somatic symptom disorder is characterized by a combination of distressing somatic symptoms and excessive or maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in response to these symptoms or associated health concerns. The individual may or may not have a diagnosable medical condition. In contrast, in psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, the psychological factors adversely affect a medical condition; the individual's thoughts, feelings, and behavior are not necessarily excessive.

The difference is one of emphasis, rather than a clear-cut distinction. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, the emphasis is on the exacerbation of the medical condition (e.g., an individual with angina that is precipitated whenever he becomes anxious). In somatic symptom disorder, the emphasis is on maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior (e.g., an individual with angina who worries constantly that she will have a heart attack, takes her blood pressure multiple times per day, and restricts her activities).

Illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by high illness anxiety that is distressing and/or disruptive to daily life with minimal somatic symptoms. The focus of clinical concern is the individual's worry about having a disease; in most cases, no serious disease is present. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, anxiety may be a relevant psychological factor affecting a medical condition, but the clinical concern is the adverse effects on the medical condition.

##h Comorbidity <--@HEADER-->

By definition, the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions entails a relevant psychological or behavioral syndrome or trait and a comorbid medical condition.

##d Factitious disorder <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

300.19 (F68.10)

##h Diagnostic Criteria <--@HEADER-->

## Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self

A. Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, associated with identified deception.

B. The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired, or injured.

C. The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.

D. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.

_Specify_:

## Single episode

## Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or induction of injury)

## Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (Previously Factitious Disorder by Proxy)

A. Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, in another, associated with identified deception.

B. The individual presents another individual (victim) to others as ill, impaired, or injured.

C. The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.

D. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.

Note: The perpetrator, not the victim, receives this diagnosis.

Specify.

## Single episode

## Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or induction of injury)

##h Recording Procedures <--@HEADER-->

When an individual falsifies illness in another (e.g., children, adults, pets), the diagnosis is factitious disorder imposed on another. The perpetrator, not the victim, is given the diagnosis. The victim may be given an abuse diagnosis (e.g., 995.54 [T74.12X]; see the chapter 'Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention").

##h Diagnostic Features <--@HEADER-->

The essential feature of factitious disorder is the falsification of medical or psychological signs and symptoms in oneself or others that are associated with the identified deception. Individuals with factitious disorder can also seek treatment for themselves or another following induction of injury or disease. The diagnosis requires demonstrating that the individual is taking surreptitious actions to misrepresent, simulate, or cause signs or symptoms of illness or injury in the absence of obvious external rewards. Methods of illness falsification can include exaggeration, fabrication, simulation, and induction. While a preexisting medical condition may be present, the deceptive behavior or induction of injury associated with deception causes others to view such individuals (or another) as more ill or impaired, and this can lead to excessive clinical intervention. Individuals with factitious disorder might, for example, report feelings of depression and suicidality following the death of a spouse despite the death not being true or the individual's not having a spouse; deceptively report episodes of neurological symptoms (e.g., seizures, dizziness, or blacking out); manipulate a laboratory test (e.g., by adding blood to urine) to falsely indicate an abnormality; falsify medical records to indicate an illness; ingest a substance (e.g., insulin or warfarin) to induce an abnormal laboratory result or illness; or physically injure themselves or induce illness in themselves or anotiier (e.g., by injecting fecal material to produce an abscess or to induce sepsis).

##h Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Individuals with factitious disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another are at risk for experiencing great psychological distress or functional impairment by causing harm to themselves and others. Family, friends, and health care professionals are also often adversely affected by their behavior. Factitious disorders have similarities to substance use disorders, eating disorders, impulse-control disorders, pedophilic disorder, and some other established disorders related to both the persistence of the behavior and the intentional efforts to conceal the disordered behavior through deception. Whereas some aspects of factitious disorders might represent criminal behavior (e.g., factitious dis-order imposed on another, in which the parent's actions represent abuse and maltreatment of a child), such criminal behavior and mental illness are not mutually exclusive. The diagnosis of factitious disorder emphasizes the objective identification of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness, rather than an inference about intent or possible underlying motivation. Moreover, such behaviors, including the induction of injury or disease, are associated with deception.

##h Prevalence <--@HEADER-->

The prevalence of factitious disorder is unknown, likely because of the role of deception in this population. Among patients in hospital settings, it is estimated that about 1% of individuals have presentations that meet the criteria for factitious disorder.

##h Development and Course <--@HEADER-->

The course of factitious disorder is usually one of intermittent episodes. Single episodes and episodes that are characterized as persistent and unremitting are both less common.

Onset is usually in early adulthood, often after hospitalization for a medical condition or a mental disorder. When imposed on another, the disorder may begin after hospitalization of the individual's child or other dependent. In individuals with recurrent episodes of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness and/or induction of injury, this pattern of successive deceptive contact with medical personnel, including hospitalizations, may become lifelong.

##h Differential Diagnosis <--@HEADER-->

Caregivers who lie about abuse injuries in dependents solely to protect themselves from liability are not diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on anotiier because protection from liability is an external reward (Criterion C, the deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards). Such caregivers who, upon observation, analysis of medical records, and/or interviews with others, are found to lie more extensively than needed for immediate self-protection are diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another.

Somatic symptom disorder. In somatic symptom disorder, there may be excessive attention and treatment seeking for perceived medical concerns, but there is no evidence that the individual is providing false information or behaving deceptively.

Malingering. Malingering is differentiated from factitious disorder by the intentional reporting of symptoms for personal gain (e.g., money, time off work). In contrast, the diagnosis of factitious disorder requires the absence of obvious rewards.

Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). Conversion disorder is characterized by neurological symptoms that are inconsistent with neurological pathophysiology. Factitious disorder with neurological symptoms is distinguished from conversion disorder by evidence of deceptive falsification of symptoms.

Borderiine personality disorder. Deliberate physical self-harm in the absence of suicidal intent can also occur in association with other mental disorders such as borderline personality disorder. Factitious disorder requires that the induction of injury occur in association with deception.

Medical condition or mental disorder not associated with intentional symptom falsification. Presentation of signs and symptoms of illness that do not conform to an identifiable medical condition or mental disorder increases the likelihood of the presence of a factitious disorder. However, the diagnosis of factitious disorder does not exclude the presence of true medical condition or mental disorder, as comorbid illness often occurs in the individual along with factitious disorder. For example, individuals who might manipulate blood sugar levels to produce symptoms may also have diabetes.

##d Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

300.89 (F45.8)

This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a somatic symptom and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the somatic symptom and related disorders diagnostic class.

Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation include the following:

1. Brief somatic symptom disorder: Duration of symptoms is less than 6 months.

2. Brief illness anxiety disorder: Duration of symptoms is less than 6 months.

3. Illness anxiety disorder without excessive health-related behaviors: Criterion D for illness anxiety disorder is not met.

4. Pseudocyesis: A false belief of being pregnant that is associated with objective signs and reported symptoms of pregnancy.

##d Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder <--@DIAGNOSIS-->

300.82 (F45.9)

This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a somatic symptom and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the somatic symptom and related disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder category should not be used unless there are decidedly unusual situations where there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
