## Introduction to Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Somatic-Compulsive and related disorders include obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), body dysmorphic disorder, hoarding disorder, trichotillomania (hair- pulling disorder), excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition, and other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., body-focused repetitive behavior disorder, obsessional jealousy).

OCD is characterized by the presence of obsessions and/or compulsions. Obsessions are recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced as intrusive and unwanted, whereas compulsions are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that an individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly. Some other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are also characterized by preoccupations and by repetitive behaviors or mental acts in response to the preoccupations. Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are characterized primarily by recurrent body-focused repetitive behaviors (e.g., hair pulling, skin picking) and repeated attempts to decrease or stop the behaviors.

The inclusion of a chapter on obsessive-compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5 reflects the increasing evidence of these disorders' relatedness to one another in terms of a range of diagnostic validators as well as the clinical utility of grouping these disorders in the same chapter. Clinicians are encouraged to screen for these conditions in individuals who present with one of them and be aware of overlaps between these conditions. At the same time, there are important differences in diagnostic validators and treatment approaches across these disorders. Moreover, there are close relationships between the anxiety disorders and some of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (e.g., OCD), which is reflected in the sequence of DSM-5 chapters, with obsessive-compulsive and related disorders following anxiety disorders.

The obsessive-compulsive and related disorders differ from developmentally normative preoccupations and rituals by being excessive or persisting beyond developmentally appropriate periods. The distinction between the presence of subclinical symptoms and a clinical disorder requires assessment of a number of factors, including the individual's level of distress and impairment in functioning.

The chapter begins with OCD. It then covers body dysmorphic disorder and hoarding disorder, which are characterized by cognitive symptoms such as perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance or the perceived need to save possessions, respectively. The chapter then covers trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, which are characterized by recurrent body-focused repetitive behaviors. Finally, it covers substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition, and other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.

While the specific content of obsessions and compulsions varies among individuals, certain symptom dimensions are common in OCD, including those of cleaning (contamination obsessions and cleaning compulsions); symmetry (symmetry obsessions and repeat-ing, ordering, and counting compulsions); forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g., aggressive, sexual, and religious obsessions and related compulsions); and harm (e.g., fears of harm to oneself or others and related checking compulsions). The tic-related specifier of OCD is used v^hen an individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.

Body dysmorphic disorder is characterized by preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flav ŝ in physical appearance that are not observable or appear only slight to others, and by repetitive behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, or reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing one's appearance v̂ ith that of other people) in response to the appearance concerns. The appearance preoccupations are not better explained by concerns with body fat or weight in an individual with an eating disorder. Muscle dysmoφhia is a form of body dysmorphic disorder that is characterized by the belief that one's body build is too small or is insufficiently muscular.

Hoarding disorder is characterized by persistent difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, regardless of their actual value, as a result of a strong perceived need to save the items and to distress associated with discarding them. Hoarding disorder differs from normal collecting. For example, symptoms of hoarding disorder result in the accumulation of a large number of possessions that congest and clutter active living areas to the extent that their intended use is substantially compromised. The excessive acquisition form of hoarding disorder, which characterizes most but not all individuals with hoarding disorder, consists of excessive collecting, buying, or stealing of items that are not needed or for which there is no available space.

Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) is characterized by recurrent pulling out of one's hair resulting in hair loss, and repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling. 

Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder is characterized by recurrent picking of one's skin resulting in skin lesions and repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking. The body- focused repetitive behaviors that characterize these two disorders are not triggered by obsessions or preoccupations; however, they may be preceded or accompanied by various emotional states, such as feelings of anxiety or boredom. They may also be preceded by an increasing sense of tension or may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the hair is pulled out or the skin is picked. Individuals with these disorders may have varying degrees of conscious awareness of the behavior while engaging in it, with some individuals displaying more focused attention on the behavior (with preceding tension and subsequent relief) and other individuals displaying more automatic behavior (with the behaviors seeming to occur without full awareness).

Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder consists of symptoms that are due to substance intoxication or withdrawal or to a medication. Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition involves symptoms characteristic of obsessive-compulsive and related disorders that are the direct pathophysiological consequence of a medical disorder. Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder consist of symptoms that do not meet criteria for a specific obsessive-compulsive and related disorder because of atypical presentation or uncertain etiology; these categories are also used for other specific syndromes that are not listed in Section Π and when insufficient information is available to diagnose the presentation as another obsessive-compulsive and related disorder. Examples of specific syndromes not listed in Section Π, and therefore diagnosed as other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder or as unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder include body-focused repetitive behavior disorder and obsessional jealousy.

Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders that have a cognitive component have insight as the basis for specifiers; in each of these disorders, insight ranges from "good or fair insight" to "poor insight" to "absent insight/delusional beliefs" with respect to disorder- related beliefs. For individuals whose obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms warrant the "with absent insight/delusional beliefs" specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a psychotic disorder.
